#### 2018-11-01: Do it without a data scientist

Over the past few years, data science has emerged as a requirement for companies to leverage powerful mathematical techniques to inform the business and help drive better decision making. Many companies like Amazon and Airbnb have integrated data science into their products, giving them a competitive advantage in a crowded marketplace. There has been so much success that now every department, across all industries, leverages data science to help make decisions. These software come with tag lines like “Get recommendations pulled from your CRM data” and “Understand your data without a data scientist”. While these products do enhance the way business traditionally operates, they are off-the-shelf, black box solutions that are made to fit all departments across all industries. The old saying “If you try to please everyone, you’ll end up pleasing no one” comes to mind.

An emerging downside I’ve noticed since these types of software have become popular is a perception that data science is a commodity skill set that can be bought as software or outsourced. The result is a reduction in an investment for in-house analytical expertise. While this isn’t true for companies where data science is the competitive advantage of the product like at Stitch Fix, Google, and Airbnb, this is true for companies and departments where data science isn’t mission critical -- departments like operations, sales, and marketing.

Here’s my opinion on why one cannot automate data science completely and still expect a positive ROI. Data science is 80% data cleansing and 20% model building. The first steps of data cleansing is fairly simple and can be automated. It involves tasks like dealing with missing and extreme values in your data. The next steps are more complicated and require deep domain knowledge of your business and industry. They often involve dealing with feature selection (i.e., choosing the data of interest) and creation of new and proxy metrics that describe your business. Because each problem is unique to your business, these tasks are subjective and requires an understanding of the trade-offs of every parameter in the model. (*A side note: Models fail, but being able to drive discussion and consensus about the trade-offs with the leaders of your team will help to ensure everyone is in agreement regardless of how the model performs. You’ll likely not be blamed if the model fails.)

The last 20% of data science is building the model using a set of mathematical equations to best describe your data and offer predictions and recommendations. Which model to choose is up to you and your business problem. But once you’ve implemented your model, how do you know the output is any good compared to other approaches? How will your model and your insights change over time as your business changes? The true approach to data science is to constantly iterate on how you cleanse the data and implement the models. The human component ensures that the data and model best represents your evolving business.

Businesses should invest in products that help them save time on low-value tasks, but they should not rely on the same products to make high-impact decisions. Invest in your data scientists as they strive to best understand your needs in a logical, objective, and pragmatic way -- better than any off-the-shelf software. 
